Real-time Robot-assisted Ergonomics*
A. Shafti, A. Ataka, B. Urbistondo Lazpita, A. Shiva, H.A. Wurdemann and K. Althoefer.


Abstract— This paper describes a novel approach in
human-robot interaction driven by ergonomics. With a clear
focus on optimising ergonomics, the approach proposed here
continuously observes a human user’s posture and by invoking
appropriate cooperative robot movements, the user’s posture
is, whenever required, brought back to an ergonomic optimum.
Effectively, the new protocol optimises the human-robot
relative position and orientation as a function of human
ergonomics. An RGB-D camera is used to calculate and
monitor human joint angles in real-time and to determine the
current ergonomics state. A total of 6 main causes of low
ergonomic states are identified, leading to 6 universal robot
responses to allow the human to return to an optimal
ergonomics state. The algorithmic framework identifies these 6
causes and controls the cooperating robot to always adapt the
environment (e.g. change the pose of the workpiece) in a way
that is ergonomically most comfortable for the interacting user.
Hence, human-robot interaction is continuously re-evaluated
optimizing ergonomics states. The approach is validated
through an experimental study, based on established ergonomic
methods and their adaptation for real-time application. The
study confirms improved ergonomics using the new approach.

I. INTRODUCTION
Collaborative robots or so-called cobots are opening new
possibilities in human-robot interaction within industrial
environments. Major design factors in the creation of
collaborative robots are health and safety. The main issues
covered within the area of health and safety in human-robot
interaction are typically those relating to collision avoidance
and ensuring that the human user is safe from immediate
injury in case the robot and/or the user are not within their
anticipated trajectory as well as behaviour due to any sort of
failure or error. This is indeed critically important, and
avoiding these states leads to averting immediate harm from
the human. However, there is less emphasis on considering
the human’s long-term health and safety. Issues relating to
the worker’s comfort during working hours on the factory
floor relate directly to their long-term health. Work related
musculoskeletal disorders (WMSDs) are the result of a
workers’ comfort issues going unnoticed for a prolonged
period of time. WMSDs are not only an issue of personal
health for the worker, they also affect the business interests of
* This work was supported by the Horizon 2020 Research and
Innovation Program under grant agreement 637095 in the framework of EU
project FourByThree.
A. Shafti is with the Dept. of Computing, Imperial College London. A.
Ataka, B. Urbistondo Lazpita and A. Shiva, are with the Centre for
Robotics Research at King’s College London.
H. A. Wurdemann is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering,
University College London, Gower St., London WC1E 6BT, UK –
h.wurdemann@ucl.ac.uk.
K. Althoefer is with the School of Engineering and Materials Science,
Queen Mary University of London, E1 4NS, London, UK –
k.althoefer@qmul.ac.uk.

Figure 1 – Robot-assisted ergonomics: the robot monitors the human’s
ergonomic state in real-time, understands it and optimises the relative
pose between the human and the workpiece constantly improving
ergonomics.

the company they are working for. Prevention of WMSDs is
therefore critical and of high importance.
Industrial workplaces are changing. The advances in safe
human-robot interaction (HRI) have led to industrial robots
moving past the large, heavy, fenced robots working on their
own and towards relatively small, lightweight and safe robots
that work hand-in-hand with human users [1]. This presents
an opportunity to considerably improve ergonomics and
comfort within the industrial workplaces through automation
and with real-time ergonomics monitoring and response
through robot assistance. This paper presents a novel
interaction approach, where the robot can sense the human
user’s ergonomic state based on established posturemonitoring methods, such as RULA, and is thus able to react
to it, with the aim to constantly improve the human’s
ergonomic state – in effect, optimising the interactions based
entirely on the human’s comfort and ergonomics. The RULA
worksheet by ErgonomicsPlus® is presented here in Figure 2
for reference throughout the paper.
There is robotics research where ergonomics methods
have been considered. In [2], the concept of ergonomics-forone, i.e. the fitting of task and tool design to a specific person
with special needs, is used for HRI. The authors create a
robotic shopping cart for visually impaired users basing their
design decisions on individual interviews with the users. The
work in [3] concerns the creation of a nine degree-of-freedom
model of the human arm to be used in the development,
testing and comfort optimisation of an exoskeleton for the
upper-arm. The authors report that the use of this method has
resulted in the device being able to interact more comfortably
with the human, and with more use of the natural limb
workspace leading to better integration with human
movements. In [4], a humanoid robot’s motion and
manipulation planning is based on the RULA directives for

The Kinect™ (which had been previously used with the
RULA method in [12] and other ergonomic techniques in
[13], [14]) is employed to ‘see’ the user’s posture as a human
inspector would do [15]. Using open source libraries to use
with the Kinect™ a human’s skeleton frames are broadcast,
providing 15 joint positions, among them the head, neck,
torso, shoulder, elbow and hand, that can be represented in a
vectorized form (Figure 3 (left)).
As Figure 2 shows a number of RULA specific angles
related to the upper-arm, lower-arm and wrist are required to
be computed from the Kinect™ output and to projected into
the human body’s anatomically defined planes, (Figure 4).
Any deviations from the ergonomic optimum caused by
these angles can be referred to as deviations in the
corresponding planes, e.g. ‘lower-arm is in transversal
deviation’. These angles are illustrated on a human body
model in Figure 5.

Figure 2 – The Rapid Upper Limb Assessment (RULA) worksheet
(arm/wrist analysis only). Step 1 (upper arm), Step 2 (lower arm) and
Step 3 (wrist) are highlighted. From the user's joint angles, the
ergonomics level is determined.

human comfort, leading to human-like movements by the
robot, aiming to achieve improved interaction with humans
as the robot’s human-like movements will be more easily
understood by the interacting human. In [5], a scooter robot
learns the paths that the worker tends to use, and adjusts its
wheel axes directions in a manner to reduce the forces
applied by the user, improving the ergonomics of the task. In
[6], the use of software-ergonomics to create more ergonomic
collaborative tasks with the use of robots is proposed.
Recently, there has been an increase in efforts to bring
ergonomic methods into the realm of HRI [7-11]. Here we
present a computationally light method for human robot
interactions based only and entirely on the optimization of
the human user’s ergonomic state. In this manner, the type of
handover industrial assistance cases described here will not
need any other type of planning or programming, but rather,
the system will just attempt to make the human comfortable,
which we propose leads to optimal fulfilment of the task at
hand.

To calculate the upper-arm and lower-arm angles, the dot
product of limb vectors is used, as follows. For the
lower-arm’s sagittal angle, the position data of the following
joints is used: the hand (wrist), elbow, and shoulder. The
positions for these are given as rh, re and rs respectively. All
positions are measured with respect to the shoulder frame.
Vectors are created by subtracting re from rh and rs from re.
Then, the lower-arm sagittal angle, formed between the
hand-elbow and elbow-shoulder vectors as described in
Figure 5, is given by:

The upper-arm’s sagittal angle, based on the position data
of the following joints, the torso (rt), neck (rn), elbow (re) and
shoulder (rs), can be computed as follows:

Using the position data of the following joints, neck (rn),
elbow (re) and shoulder (rs) measured with respect to the
shoulder frame, the upper-arm’s coronal angle can be
calculated as follows:

II. METHODS
A. Sensor-based, real-time ergonomics assessment
In our set-up, we use a suite of sensors (including the Kinect depth sensor and inertial measurement units) to determine the posture of the interacting human and the Baxter®
Research Robot to adjust the interaction objects so that ergonomics can be achieved. Our algorithms run in the Robot
Operating System (ROS). In short, we aim to achieve robot
assisted ergonomics integrating the posture ergonomics
assessment method (here, Rapid Upper Limb Assessment RULA) into our system.

Figure 3 – (left) The human skeleton as detected by the Kinect™
camera and visualised in RVIZ; (right) The wearable double Inertial
Measurement Unit (IMU) setup used to detect wrist angles in real-time.

Figure 4 – Anatomical planes of the human body. The sagittal plane
divides the body into a left and right side. The coronal plane divides it
into a front and rear side. The transversal plane divides it into an upper
and lower side.

Finally, the lower-arm’s transversal angle based on the
position data of the following joints, the neck (rn), hand (rh),
elbow (re) and shoulder (rs) can be calculated as follows:

The above provides all the upper-arm and lower-arm
angles required to fulfil steps 1 and 2 of the RULA worksheet
as shown in Figure 2.
The above angles suffice to detect the type of ergonomic
deviation. To avoid errors in the detection of thresholds due
to shortcomings of the Kinect™, particularly within the nonsagittal movements possibly due to issues within the OpenNI
library, flags are defined as a redundancy to ensure the type
and direction of deviation are detected correctly [7].
The data received from the Kinect™ camera is not
enough to make judgements on wrist angles. Here we use two
Inertial Measurement Units (IMUs) Bosch® BNO055
Absolute Orientation Sensor. These two BNO055 sensors,
each providing 9 degrees of freedom (DOF) data; 3-axis
acceleration, 3-axis gyroscope and 3-axis magnetometer data,
are integrated with a microcontroller and auxiliary electronics
and embedded in a glove and wristband, respectively [7].
Two of the BNO055 sensors are used, one of them to be
placed on the lower-arm as reference, and the other to be
placed on the back of the hand to determine the wrist bending
and twist angles (steps 3 and 4 of RULA worksheet, table A
in Figure 2).
Figure 3 (right)) shows the IMU sensors setup, as well as
the printed circuit board (PCB) created to interface the
sensors. Using the KinectTM and the IMU sensors, all
necessary angles to calculate the RULA score for the human
arm, Figure 2, can be determined in real time.
B. Non-ergonomic state avoidance through robot assistance
The next step is to use the RULA score calculated based
on the acquired sensor information, to decide on the suitable
robot response to improve ergonomics. Looking at the full
RULA arm score, 144 different ergonomic states exist.
However, considering that the full RULA score for the arm is
based on individual scores for the different arm sections (i.e.
steps 1-4 in Figure 2), it is possible to determine which
section of the arm is in a non-ergonomic state by monitoring
the individual scores. Hence, if individual robot responses are
created for each section of the arm for an ergonomic
optimum, one can respond to all ergonomic states, as the

Figure 5 – View of the human body, showing ergonomic deviation
angles projected on the sagittal, coronal and transversal planes of the
body.

appropriate overall response will always be a combination of
the individual responses.
The arm is divided, within RULA, to the “upper-arm”,
“lower-arm” and “wrist”. Each of these have two angles
being monitored. The upper-arm’s sagittal and coronal,
lower-arm’s sagittal and transversal angles and the bend and
twist angles for the wrist (refer to Figure 5). Therefore, any
particular RULA arm score can be broken down into scores
for the upper-arm, lower-arm and wrist, each of which could
be outside the ergonomic optimum area defined for it. Once
the source of non-ergonomics is identified, the response will
be to move that particular section of the arm back into its
ergonomic optimum.
 Upper-arm responses
Looking at the RULA description for the upper-arm
(Figure 6) the anatomic figures show the scores for different
ranges of sagittal angles. These are scored from 1 to 4. Step 1
also provides adjustments to the score, the relevant one of
which is “if upper-arm is abducted add +1”. This is referring
to the upper-arm coronal angle and means that if this
projected value has any value larger than 0 (which in practice
would mean an abduction of the upper-arm) then the upperarm score should be increased by one point. In our algorithm,
this threshold is set to 10⁰ to avoid unwanted reactions for
small deviations.
The upper-arm being in a non-ergonomic region based on
its sagittal angle can occur in two scenarios: (i) upper-arm in
angles larger than 20⁰ to the front (Figure 6). The reason for
this would be the workpiece being higher than the human
user’s ergonomic zone and also out of their reach. Therefore,
the response should be for the workpiece to be moved down
and towards the user. (ii) upper-arm in angles larger than 20⁰
to the back. The reason for this would be the workpiece being
too close to the human user. Therefore, the response should
be for it to be moved further away from them.
The responses for the upper-arm are therefore in the form
of a translation. The human is trying to reach a particular
target zone on the workpiece which is outside their
ergonomic zone. For the human’s arm to move back into the
ergonomic optimum, the target zone needs to be moved into
their ergonomic reach. The robot tool centre point’s (TCP)
response translation will be the same as the translation that
would take the human’s arm back into the ergonomic
position. Effectively, the human will be following the
targeted area on the workpiece as the robot moves it into a
more ergonomically reachable position. The robot’s
translation values therefore depend on how far the human

Figure 6 – (1) Calculations for the translation to improve the upperarm's deviation in the sagittal plane. (2) Calculations for the translation
to improve the upper-arm's deviation in the coronal plane. The value
‘a’ refers to the human’s shoulder-elbow length.

arm is from its ergonomic position. As the sensing system
provides actual deviation angles, it is possible to find the
values for these translations, Figure 6.
The line marked as ‘a’ represents the human upper-arm,
viewed from the side, with ‘a’ being the shoulder-elbow
length and αs the angle by which the upper-arm is deviated in
the sagittal plane. Looking at the RULA descriptions for the
upper-arm in Figure 6, it is obvious that the most ergonomic
position for the upper-arm is the zero angle, pointing
downwards. This is the aim of translation t in Figure 6.1; to
move the upper-arm back to the zero-angle position, i.e. the
ergonomic optimum.
The signs for the final values of the translation are
adjusted based on the defined axes directions, shown in the
upper right corner of Figure 6.1. Note that if αs is negative,
meaning the arm is deviated towards the human user’s back,
the same equations still hold for the translation value, as the
direction of the translation in the y-axis is adjusted through
the negative value of αs negating the overall value for the y
translation.
For deviations from the ergonomic zone in the coronal
plane, i.e. if the upper-arm is abducted, the response is
similar, but applied in different axes, refer to Figure 6.2. The
upper-arm being abducted, in the case of a right-handed user,
means they are reaching further out to the right. Thus, to
correct the posture, the robot must move the workpiece to the
user’s left, forcing them to bring their upper-arm back into
the ergonomic zone. The calculations for this are shown in
Figure 6.2.
Here, again, ‘a’ is the length of the upper-arm. However,
the arm is being viewed from behind the human – note the
change in axes directions on the upper right corner of Figure
6.2 as compared to Figure 6.1. The angle αc, is therefore
showing the human’s upper-arm deviated to the right.
Translation t aims to bring the upper-arm’s end point to the
left and down, back to its ergonomic optimum. Calculations
are similar to that of Figure 6.1. The final translation value
signs are again adjusted according to the defined axes, and
also hold for left-handed persons.
The above calculations represent all translations needed
to improve the ergonomics of the upper-arm. By making the
translations dependent on the monitored angles, all different
types of non-ergonomic deviations for the shoulder joint are
covered by two main translations. The shoulder-elbow length
‘a’ does not need to be pre-programmed, as the Kinect™
system provides position points for both the shoulder and the
elbow, and therefore, the value for ‘a’ can be calculated
directly from the Kinect™ data, as the magnitude of the
shoulder-elbow vector. Including the value ‘a’ in the

Figure 7 – (1) Calculations for the translation to improve the lowerarm's deviation in the sagittal plane, for angles larger than 100⁰. (2)
Calculations for the translation to improve the lower-arm's deviation in
the sagittal plane, for angles smaller than 60⁰. (3) Calculations for the
translation to improve the lower-arm's deviation in the transversal
plane. Value ‘b’ represents the user’s elbow-wrist length.

calculations enables the protocol to automatically adjust to
each individual user.
 Lower-arm responses
Considering the RULA directives for the lower-arm
(Figure 7) there are clear values for different angle ranges for
deviation within the sagittal plane. If the lower-arm is
deviated to the right or left, going outside the sagittal plane
and showing angles projected on the transversal plane, an
extra point is added to its overall score. The latter can be
detected through the transversal angle described earlier in this
paper (refer to Figure 5). If the transversal deviation angle is
larger than the threshold of 10⁰, the lower-arm will be
considered to be outside the sagittal plane and in transversal
deviation. This threshold is chosen so as to avoid unwanted
reactions for small deviations.
Similar to calculations for the upper-arm responses, to
respond to deviations of the lower-arm in the sagittal plane,
an ergonomic optimum target area needs to be considered, so
that calculations are based on reaching that optimum.
The ergonomic optimum area for the lower-arm, based on
Figure 7, is within the 60⁰-100⁰ range. The value 90⁰ will be
considered as the ergonomic target area, which was also
considered by the creators of RULA as the optimum point
[16].
Therefore, the non-ergonomic cases will be if the sagittal
angle is higher than 100⁰ (case 1, Figure 7.1) or lower than
60⁰ (case 2, Figure 7.2) and in both cases the goal is to bring
the lower-arm into the 90⁰ position. Calculations for case 1,
similar to the upper-arm’s sagittal deviations, are shown in
Figure 7.1.
Calculations for case 2 are shown in Figure 7.2. As can be
seen, the result of calculations, considering axis directions,
end up the same as for case 1, i.e.,

Figure 8 – Calculations for the translation to improve the wrist's
deviation in the sagittal plane. (See also Figure 2 (Step 3)).

.
Deviations of the lower-arm in the transversal plane are
shown in the calculations of Figure 7.3. In this case, the robot
will need to move the workpiece away from the human, and
to their left. This is achieved through the translation
described in Figure 7.3. This response was calculated for
deviations to the human user’s right. Left hand motions use
the same equations.
 Wrist responses
The wrist responses are implemented slightly differently
to the responses for the upper-arm and lower-arm. Without
loss of generality we do not consider twisting movements of
the wrist, as not needed in a task like a welding operation.
Two types of deviations remain: (i) deviations in the
transversal plane and (ii) deviations in the sagittal plane.
Figure 8 shows the RULA indications for the wrist
deviations. Those marked as ‘+2’ and ‘+3’ are transversal,
because of the way the wrist is held during welding, i.e. with
the palm parallel to the sagittal plane. The case ‘Add +1’ is a
sagittal plane deviation.
When the wrist’s transversal angle is in the nonergonomic range, it is because the workpiece orientation is
suboptimal. The response to deviations in the transverse
plane will therefore be a rotation of the workpiece rather than
a translation.
In case (i) described above, considering there is no wrist
twist, and that the only deviation is within the transversal
plane, the robot needs only to rotate the workpiece by the
same angle and in the opposite direction.
For case (ii), where the deviation is in the sagittal plane,
i.e. the wrist is bent upwards or downwards, the correct
response will again be a translation, as the workpiece is either
too high or too low and needs to be moved into a better
position. The response and its calculations are shown in
Figure 8.
It must be noted that within these calculations, the tool
length (such as a welding tool) needs to be considered as
well, in order to achieve the correct translation. Average tool
and hand size are used and pre-programmed into the
algorithm, as they cannot be measured through the Kinect™.
The above calculations hold for up (positive angle) and down
(negative angle) movements.
 Calibration of the Posture Sensors
While the Kinect™ and Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU)
sensors provide absolute values, there are some offsets
observed in certain cases, particularly due to the difference in
the users’ anatomy, which can affect most of all the wrist
angle as the IMUs are placed on the arm and their orientation
will depend on muscle shapes, but also sometimes the
Kinect™ calculated angles. To avoid errors, an initial
calibration step is performed for each participant.
This consists of the person, standing in what is defined as
the calibration posture, which is based on the ergonomic
optimum: The upper-arm at the 0⁰ position, lower-arm at 90⁰,
without any coronal or transversal deviations. The palm is to
be held parallel to the sagittal plane, with 0⁰ wrist angle.
Once the participant is in this position, all joint angles are

adjusted to these references. For the wrist angle, the
orientation matrix converting the orientation of IMU2 (the
one placed on the wrist) to that of IMU1 (the one placed on
the back of the hand – refer to Figure 3) is calculated and
considered as reference, so that all orientation changes
observed in IMU1 are calculated with reference to the
original calibrated orientation difference between the two
IMUs. In this manner, the angle of the wrist will be
calculated independent of the initial deviation between the
two IMUs which is due to the user’s anatomy. The shoulderelbow length (‘a’ in Figure 6) and the elbow-wrist length (‘b’
in Figure 7) are also recorded, defining the elbow-hip and
wrist-elbow distances needed for the flags of §III.A.
C. Active robot assistance for enhanced ergonomics
Our approach generates responses for low-ergonomic
postures in different parts of the arm, in the framework of
RULA, to bring the collaborating human user back into an
ergonomically optimum posture. The base of our algorithm is
the RULA arm score indicating of whether there is a need for
ergonomic improvements. Once activated, our algorithm will
go through a series of arm section-specific RULA score
checks, to identify the source of the ergonomic deviation. For
each identified deviation, the correction as defined in §III.B,
is realized by the robot. Our algorithms checks continuously
for ergonomic issues and applies improvements where
necessary.
Based on the RULA scores providing angles and
estimations of which areas around the body would be
considered ergonomic, or non-ergonomic, our algorithm
considers small virtual windows in front of the human that
would be ergonomically optimum to work in. The
implementation of our algorithm starts by checking the
RULA score for the arm – if the score is 1, meaning totally
ergonomic, the algorithm does not react but simply keeps
monitoring the score for changes. A RULA arm score of 2 or
higher indicates that the human is leaving the ergonomic
window. The value selected here as 2, results in a very strict
ergonomic window, following RULA very closely. This
value can however be adjusted. A higher threshold will lead
to less assistive responses by the robot.
If a RULA arm score larger than 1 is detected, it is
necessary to assist the human, but first, the cause of the
problem is to be identified and a prioritisation is needed on
which cause to attend to first. The priority with which
different arm sections are checked for problems and
responded to is based on which of these sections is the
biggest cause of the human leaving the ergonomic window.
Highest priority is assigned to deviations within the coronal
and transversal planes for the upper and lower-arm, as they
happen frequently if the human is trying to reach further, and
lead to large increases on the RULA score.
The upper-arm and lower-arm sagittal deviations have a
breathing room before leaving the ergonomic window (lower
than 20⁰ for the upper-arm and between 60⁰-100⁰ for the
lower-arm are considered ergonomic) and do not
immediately cause ergonomic problems. But this is not the
case for the wrist, as any deviation will quickly lead to a rise
in the ergonomics score. Therefore, the next priority to be
checked and responded to is the wrist. The last priority is
assigned to deviations of the upper-arm and lower-arm in the

sagittal plane. Here, the upper-arm is given priority, as when
the upper-arm and lower-arm are both in sagittal deviation,
fixing the upper-arm typically leads the human user to fix the
lower-arm issue intuitively.
III. EXPERIMENTAL STUDY AND EVALUATION
To evaluate the ergonomic improvement of the new
approach, an experiment is designed. To run the algorithm on
an actual robot and perform tests and experiments, the
Baxter® Research Robot from Rethink Robotics™ was used.
A single arm of the Baxter is used; the other arm is idle. The
Baxter screen is used to show the RULA arm score in
real-time, with colour coded title cards for the user’s
information.
The experiment consists of performing a set of targeted
movements, while RULA score and Electromyography
signals from the participant are recorded. The latter is taken
from the following muscles: Trapezius, Deltoid, Triceps
Brachii, Biceps Brachii, Wrist Extensors and Wrist Flexors to
be used with the Muscle Effort Score (MES) created by the
authors in [7]. The pre-planned task is to be performed in two
modes: (1) without robot assistance (‘human-only’) and (2)
with robot assistance (‘robot-assisted’), to evaluate whether
or not our algorithm improves the ergonomics of the
collaborative task.
The experimental setup consists of a cardboard box, held
by the Baxter robot, representing the workpiece. The
participant is directed to reach to certain target areas on the
workpiece, while holding a load of 900g in their hand. This
load is chosen to simulate a typical welding gun’s weight.
The target areas are marked and numbered clearly on the
workpiece, and shown to the participant, to make sure all
participants go through the same procedure. The standing
position for all participants is the same and is marked on the
floor for consistency. The participants are asked not to move
their feet nor use any movements of the trunk and back to
reach the target areas, but rather to rely only on the
movements of the arm. The trajectory and its timing are
designed to last under 3 minutes. Each participant is to go
through the trajectory 3 times in each mode, thus a total of 6
trials per person. Throughout the trials, the participant’s
muscle activity is recorded, using a custom-made wearable
setup, described in further detail in [7]. The RULA score is
recorded in real-time using the Kinect™ setup (refer to §III).
A calibration step is conducted at the beginning of each trial
(see §III.B).
5 participants took part in these experiments with an age

Figure 9 – (left) Placement of targets on the cardboard workpiece. Odd
numbers are on the bottom side and even numbers on the top side.
Participants will reach for these targets in sequence; (right) RULA
results for the human-only and robot-assisted experiments averaged
across all participants and trials. Results show a significant
improvement on ergonomics with robot assistance.

range of 26.5±2.5 and height range of 179±11cm. For the
robot-assisted mode of the test, each participant is asked to
reach for the target areas in sequence (refer to Figure 9 (left));
if this leads to a non-ergonomic posture, the robot will
respond by moving the workpiece to what it considers to be a
more ergonomic position. The participant will follow the
workpiece and keep on target. Once the robot’s response is
complete, the participant is asked to stay on target for
20seconds. This is repeated for all 6 target areas while realtime EMG and RULA for the 20seconds of targeting are
recorded. The same process is performed in human-only
mode. In this mode, the robot is only keeping the workpiece
steady in its predefined initial position. The participant will
reach to the target area and keep on target for 20seconds,
similar to the robot-assisted approach, however without any
movement of the workpiece by the robot. EMG and RULA
are again recorded for these periods.
EMG results are investigated using the Muscle Effort
Score (MES) method created by the author [7]. Final MES
results show no significant difference between the
robot-assisted and human-only approaches in terms of
external load. This is to be expected, as the MES method
provides insight on the external load being handled by the
participant, and this is the same in both cases for this
experiment. Also, for the performed tasks, the postures do not
reach beyond the medium range of RULA, thus no
significant intrinsic muscle loading effects are present.
RULA results show a clear difference between the two
modes of operation. Figure 9 (right) shows RULA values
averaged across participants for each target area (targets 1 to
6, Figure 9 (left)) for both robot-assisted and human-only
modes. The robot-assisted mode keeps a steady RULA value
around 1, which is the lowest score. Values higher than 1 are
observed in cases where the participants are close to the edge
of the ergonomic window, thus the overall RULA value is
changing between 1 and 2 with small movements, leading to
an average higher than 1. The robot does not respond as these
changes are happening in under a second considered
transient. For the human-only mode, RULA results change
for different target areas between high and low values. Since
even-numbered targets are already at a comfortable reaching
position, these targets are showing values close to ‘1’, also in
the human-only results; odd-numbered targets are showing
higher RULA values of up to ‘3’. In contrast, the robotassisted method is consistently in the ergonomic range,
Figure 9 (right).
IV. CONCLUSIONS
The main aim of our work is to create an ergonomicsbased approach that employs robot assistance to improve
human posture in the work environment. This new approach
is successful in achieving real-time robot-aided posture
improvement during manual work, making use of the
well-established and widely-used posture ergonomics
assessment method, RULA. The new approach has been
tested using a Baxter Robot in a collaborative scenario.
Results show that enabling the proposed robot-assisted
ergonomic interaction approach is consistently improving
ergonomics for all users that took part in the study.

REFERENCES
[1] I. Maurtua et al., “FourByThree: Imagine humans and robots working
hand in hand,” in Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation (ETFA),
2016 IEEE 21st International Conference on, 2016, pp. 1–8.
[2] V. a. Kulyukin and C. Gharpure, “Ergonomics-for-one in a robotic
shopping cart for the blind,” Proceeding 1st ACM SIGCHI/SIGART Conf.
Human-robot Interact. - HRI ’06, no. November, p. 142, 2006.
[3] A. Schiele and F. C. T. Van Der Helm, “Kinematic design to improve
ergonomics in human machine interaction,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst.
Rehabil. Eng., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 456–469, 2006.
[4] F. Zacharias, C. Schlette, F. Schmidt, C. Borst, J. Rossmann, and G.
Hirzinger, “Making planned paths look more human-like in humanoid robot
manipulation planning,” Proc. - IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., pp. 1192–
1198, 2011.
[5] E. S. Boy, E. Burdet, C. L. Teo, and J. E. Colgate, “Investigation of
motion guidance with scooter cobot and collaborative learning,” IEEE
Trans. Robot., vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 245–255, 2007.
[6] A. Bannat et al., “Artificial cognition in production systems,” IEEE
Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 148–174, 2011.
[7] A. Shafti, “Electromyography-guided and Robot-assisted Ergonomics”,
Doctoral Thesis, King’s College London, 2017.
[8] K. Wansoo, J. Lee, L. Peternel, N. Tsagarakis, and A. Ajoudani,
"Anticipatory robot assistance for the prevention of human static joint
overloading in human–robot collaboration." IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 68–75, 2018.
[9] A.G. Marin, M.S. Shourijeh, P.E. Galibarov, M. Damsgaard, L. Fritzsch
and F. Stulp, “Optimizing Contextual Ergonomics Models in Human-Robot
Interaction.” Proc. – IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS), pp. 1–9, 2018.
[10] B. Busch, M. Toussaint and M. Lopes, “Planning ergonomic sequences
of actions in human-robot interaction.” Proc. - IEEE Int. Conf. Robot.
Autom., pp. 1916–1923, 2018.
[11] L. Peternel, W. Kim, J. Babič and A. Ajoudani, “Towards ergonomic
control of human-robot co-manipulation and handover.” Proc. - IEEE Int.
Conf. on Humanoid Robotics, pp. 55–60, 2017.
[12] H. Haggag, M. Hossny, S. Nahavandi, and D. Creighton, “Real time
ergonomic assessment for assembly operations using kinect,” Proc. UKSim 15th Int. Conf. Comput. Model. Simulation, UKSim 2013, pp. 495–
500, 2013.
[13] J. A. Diego-Mas and J. Alcaide-Marzal, “Using KinectTM sensor in
observational methods for assessing postures at work,” Appl. Ergon., vol.
45, no. 4, pp. 976–985, 2014.
[14] C. C. Martin et al., “A real-time ergonomic monitoring system using
the Microsoft Kinect,” 2012 IEEE Syst. Inf. Eng. Des. Symp. SIEDS 2012,
pp. 50–55, 2012.
[15] J. Han, L. Shao, D. Xu, and J. Shotton, “Enhanced computer vision
with microsoft kinect sensor: A review,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 43, no.
5, pp. 1318–1334, 2013.
[16]L. Mcatamney and E. N. Corlett, “RULA: a survey method for the
investigation of world-related upper limb disorders,” Appl. Ergon., vol. 24,
no. 2, pp. 91–99, 1993.

